DOCSP-30544: compound operations (crud) (#20)
mongodb/docs-rust: source/fundamentals/crud/compound-operations.txt

.. _rust-compound-operations:

===================
Compound Operations
===================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to perform **compound operations** in
the {+driver-short+}.

Compound operations combine the functionality of read and write
operations into one :manual:`atomic </reference/glossary/#std-term-atomic-operation>` action. If you perform
a read operation and a write operation in sequence, someone might change
your target document between the operations, leading to unexpected
results. When you perform a compound operation, MongoDB prevents
intermediate data changes by placing a write lock on the document you
are modifying until the operation completes.

You can perform the following compound operations with the driver:

- Find and delete one document
- Find and update one document
- Find and replace one document

This guide includes the following sections:

> - :ref:`Sample Data for Examples <rust-compound-sample-data>`: presents

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- :ref:`Sample Data for Examples <rust-compound-sample-data>`: Presents
```

applies to all items in this list

Author: I think you and chris followed up about this rule, and it looked like items should be lowercased

- :ref:`Additional Information <rust-crud-compound-addtl-info>`:
  provides links to additional resources and API documentation for types
  and methods mentioned in this guide

.. TODO .. tip::

..    If you need to perform atomic read and writes on more than one
..    document, use :ref:`transactions <rust-transactions>`.

.. _rust-compound-sample-data:

Sample Data for Examples
------------------------

.. TODO decide on structs in crud

The examples in this guide use the following sample documents. Each
document represents a student and contains information about their age
and the school that they attend:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false
   
   { "name": "Alex Johnson", "age": 8, "school": "Lakeside Elementary" },
   { "name": "Samara Khan", "age": 11, "school": "Rolling Hills Middle School" },
   { "name": "Ben Joseph", "age": 16, "school": "Aurora High School" },
   { "name": "Deanna Porowski", "age": 10, "school": "Lakeside Elementary" }

.. _rust-find-and-delete:

Find and Delete a Document
--------------------------

The ``find_one_and_delete()`` method finds and deletes the first document that
matches the specified query filter. If a document matches the filter

> criteria, the method returns a ``Some`` type. If it does not match any
> documents, it returns a ``None`` type.

Reviewer: I: The document does the matching, not the method. Applies to whole page

S:

```suggestion
criteria, the method returns a ``Some`` type. If no documents match,
it returns a ``None`` type.
```

Author: changed in the three sections

.. note:: 

>    If you don't need to find and delete a document in a single

Reviewer: Q: Is there any advantage to calling them separately? Doing other processing between the method calls, maybe? Just don't want to confuse people about which way is preferred.

Applies to other notes on page too.

Author: yes, you risk data changes between calls by separating the calls

   operation, you can call the ``find_one()`` method followed by the
   ``delete_one()`` method.

Modify Find and Delete Behavior
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can optionally modify the behavior of the ``find_one_and_delete()``
method by passing a ``FineOneAndDeleteOptions`` instance as a parameter.

> To use default values for each setting, specify the value ``None`` as
> the options parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use default values for each setting, specify the value ``None`` for
the options parameter.
```

Applies to same paragraph in each page section too

The following table describes the options available in
``FineOneAndDeleteOptions``:

> .. list-table::

Reviewer: I: Some entries in this table are missing types; others are missing default values. Can you double-check?

Also applies to later tables on page

Author: I havent been able to locate some of the default values, but i can definitely add types for all of the entries in every table.

   :widths: 30 70
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Option
     - Description

   * - ``max_time`` 
     - | The maximum amount of time, in milliseconds, that the query can

>          run for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         run.
```

Applies in later paragraphs too

       | Type: ``Duration``

   * - ``projection`` 
     - | The projection to use when returning results.
       | Default: ``nil``

   * - ``sort`` 

>      - | The sort to use when returning results. By default, the driver

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - | The sorting order[?] to use when returning results. By default, the driver
```

Applies to whole page

         returns documents in their natural order, or as they appear in
         the database. To learn more, see :manual:`natural order </reference/glossary/#std-term-natural-order>`
         in the Server manual glossary.
       | Default: ``nil``

   * - ``write_concern``
     - | The write concern for the operation. To learn more about write
         concerns, see :manual:`Write Concern
         </reference/write-concern/>` in the Server manual.
       | Type: ``WriteConcern``

   * - ``collation`` 
     - | The collation to use when sorting results.
       | Type: ``Collation``
       | Default: ``nil``

   * - ``hint`` 
     - | The index to use for the operation. To learn more about
         indexes, see :manual:`Indexes </indexes/>` in the Server
         manual. This option is available only when connecting to
         {+server+} versions 4.4 and later.
       | Type: ``Hint``
       | Default: ``nil``

   * - ``let_vars``
     - | A map of parameters and values. These parameters can be accessed

>          as variables in aggregation expressions. This option is available

Reviewer: I: use active voice

S: Rephrase second sentence in active voice, with who/what is accessing the variables as the subject

Applies to same entry in later tables too

         only when connecting to {+server+} versions 5.0 and later.
       | Type: ``Document``

   * - ``comment``
     - | An arbitrary ``Bson`` value tied to the operation to trace
         it through the database profiler, ``currentOp``, and
         logs. This option is available only when connecting to
         {+server+} versions 4.4 and later.
       | Type: ``Bson``

.. TODO add links to guides for relevant options

> .. note:: Instantiating Options

Reviewer: S: Delete this note, given the following example

Applies to later sections too

Author: Don't you think mentioning the design pattern might be useful to users who see the example and dont know whats going on?

Reviewer: Sure, that makes sense. What do you think about taking it out of an admonition and just letting it be text?

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/crud/compound.rs
   :start-after: begin-find-replace-options
   :end-before: end-find-replace-options
   :language: rust
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

Find and Replace Example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This example shows how to call the ``find_one_and_replace()`` method with the
following parameters:

- A query filter that matches a document where the value of ``name``
  includes the string ``"Johnson"``
- A replacement document that describes a new student
- A ``FindOneAndReplaceOptions`` instance that returns the document
  after replacement and projects only the ``name`` and ``school`` fields
  in the output

.. io-code-block::
   :copyable: true

   .. input:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/crud/compound.rs
      :start-after: begin-find_one_and_replace
      :end-before: end-find_one_and_replace
      :language: rust
      :dedent:

   .. output:: 
      :language: console
      :visible: false

      Document after replacement:
      {
        "name": "Toby Fletcher",
        "school": "Durango High School"
      }

.. _rust-crud-compound-addtl-info:

Additional Information
----------------------

> To learn more about performing the operations mentioned, see the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn more about performing the previous operations, see the
```
